# 3.1. The built-in `avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328` target

The Rust nightly compiler contains a built-in target, `avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328`, that
generates code for the AVR [ATmega328](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ATmega328) using the
GNU AVR-GCC toolchain for linking support.

## Targeting custom microcontrollers by adapting 'avr-unkonwn-gnu-atmega328'

See the section [./005.1-the-target-specification-json-file.md](5.1. The Target Specification JSON File) for
more information about how Rust target specification JSON files work.

To generate a Rust target specification JSON file from the builtin:


```bash
rustc --print target-spec-json -Z unstable-options --target avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328 > my-custom-avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328.json
```

This prints the target specification JSON file `my-custom-avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328.json`:

```json
{
  "arch": "avr",
  "cpu": "atmega328",
  "data-layout": "e-P1-p:16:8-i8:8-i16:8-i32:8-i64:8-f32:8-f64:8-n8-a:8",
  "eh-frame-header": false,
  "env": "",
  "exe-suffix": ".elf",
  "executables": true,
  "is-builtin": true,
  "late-link-args": {
    "gcc": [
      "-lgcc"
    ]
  },
  "linker": "avr-gcc",
  "linker-flavor": "gcc",
  "linker-is-gnu": true,
  "llvm-target": "avr-unknown-unknown",
  "os": "unknown",
  "pre-link-args": {
    "gcc": [
      "-mmcu=atmega328",
      "-Wl,--as-needed"
    ]
  },
  "target-c-int-width": "16",
  "target-endian": "little",
  "target-pointer-width": "16",
  "vendor": "unknown"
}
```

To adapt this file to target a different microcontroller:

  * Replace the top-level `"cpu": "atmega328"` with `"cpu": "YOUR-AVR-VARIANT-NAME"`
  * Replace `"-mmcu=atmega328"` with `"-mmcu=YOUR-AVR-VARIANT-NAME"`

The file can then be passed to Rust via the `rustc --target <JSON FILE PATH>` instead of
`rustc --target avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328`, which will tailor the generated code to your
desired microcontroller.

It is also possible to customize link parameters if desired by modifying the JSON file.

## Compiling for AVR without the GNU toolchain

At the moment, the only builtin AVR target `avr-unknown-gnu-atmega328` always requires
AVR-GCC, AVR-libc and AVR-binutils from the GNU project.

The LLVM LLD linker has some limited support for AVR which in the future could be leveraged
to allow compiling AVR Rust binaries without the dependency on the GNU toolchain. Some work
on `compiler-builtins` and others would also be required. At the moment, the GNU toolchain
is a hard dependency.
no t
